as soon as Hamas carried out its
terrorist attack on Israel many sought
to grasp its scale and Terror through
historical comparisons the one that has
clearly become dominant is 911 but
there's another way to read this
comparison and that's by focusing not on
the attack itself but on the response to
it the US lad war on terror resulted in
hundreds of thousands of Civilian
casualties in other countries and in the
erosion of civil liberties within the US
now as the is is Hamas War threatens to
grow into a wider conflict President
Biden himself has warned Israel not to
repeat the same mistakes that America
made after
911 to unpack this comparison we wanted
to talk with Spencer Akerman he is a
piter prize winner columnist at the
nation author of the newsletter forever
Wars and of the book reign of terror
which is really a good examination of
not just the 9911 attack itself but also
of the Grim chain of consequences that
followed this interview offers only one
possible reading of a very complex
situation but given akerman's extensive
writing on this topic we really wanted
to have his perspective on this
comparison we recorded this interview on
October 26th so keep that in mind as
events quickly unfold and the context
evolves many have compared the Hamas
terrorist attack against the Israel
2911 as with every comparison the
aspects that are similar are highlighted
while the differences are pushed in the
background you have written extensively
on 911 so I really wanted to ask you
what are the similarities between these
two terrorist attacks and when we make
this comparison what is that we are
highlighting and what is that we are
perhaps
forgetting so the comparisons themselves
to the
actual attacks are somewhat superficial
um they're better understood in terms of
politics and less so in terms of um what
you might call a military analysis of
the strike first uh Hamas attacked on
three domains air sea and land and then
secondly Hamas carried out um violent
raids against civilians um in nearby cim
in southern Israel um there was no
followon attack that Al-Qaeda had um
from 911 what's similar is the sense of
profound psychological shock that this
caused to both societies that that had
come to think of themselves as for more
so in the American sense than the
Israeli sense but firmly insulated
against attacks of this uh of this sort
there's another way to look at the
comparison and that's by focusing not on
the attack itself but on the resp
response to the attack but before we do
that let's revisit what the US response
to 911 was
so what is the legacy of the war on
terror what did the US achieve the
legacy of the war on terror is one of
absolute devastation and disaster abroad
and the uh erosion of American democracy
at home the war on terror was a Doorway
to the worst aspects of American History
its history of settler colonialism and
white supremacy given undercover of
trauma a pathway to yield state power
and to do so in a manner that
devastated Iraq Afghanistan Pakistan
Libya Syria Somalia all given both the
tools and the cover of counterterrorism
I I think it's pretty clear that in
terms of its achievements abroad the war
on terror was a failure the US left
Afghanistan 20 years later defeated but
I don't know if the effects at home are
as
clear can you elaborate on how the 9/11
response led to the erosion of civil
liberties and Democratic
institutions with some examples yes from
the start the war on terror created an
enormous surveillance drag net expanded
the ability of law enforcement to
collect records without warrants from
judges specifying specific crimes
Muslims around the country found
themselves at the mercy of not just the
Department of Homeland Security but also
the FBI and local police forces all of
whom had additional resources both money
and material from counterterrorism
fundings both from the Pentagon and the
Department of Homeland Security and
these were put to use surveilling
imprisoning uh Muslim civil rights
leaders Muslim Business Leaders everyday
Muslims for the generation in many ways
of informants in order to keep mosques
and other community centers um
suppressed as this went on increasingly
this mood of um permitted and normalized
nativism aimed against Muslims spread as
these things always do these things
inevitably expanded the aperture of the
possible um allowed
islamophobia and uh the politics of um
minority suppression firmly into the
Coalition that would become Donald
Trump's magga Coalition and these are
now enduring features of American
political and social Landscapes so with
this assessment in mind do you think
that Israel is making the same mistakes
absolutely Israel is making the same
mistakes and America is complicit in
permitting Israel to make the same
mistakes out of 911 so what do I mean by
that first of all the distinguishing
military feature of the global war on
terror is the pursuit not of achievable
and art even articulable States but of
the application of violence as a
substitute for that with prevarications
all along the way by American political
and Military figures saying that you
know a stable Victory is to be had you
know it's some months down the road
provided we stay the course maybe modify
the course somewhat but fundamentally
stay the course Israel is engaging in a
Devastation of Gaza not a Devastation of
Hamas Israel cannot destroy Hamas among
the reasons we know this is because
Israel did not destroy the PLO during
two decades of occupation in southern
Lebanon Israel ultimately made Hezbollah
stronger and itself less and less able
to safely extricate after Israel did in
fact extricate in 2000 by 2006 after hez
Bala took some hostages in Northern
Israel very similar to what we've seen
um after um on uh October 7th Israel
launched yet another devastating war on
Lebanon to expressly destroy Hezbollah
that failed as well and now Hezbollah is
both strong as it's ever been and aiming
an enormous rocket and missile Arsenal
as a potential second front supported by
Iran on um Israel's northern border it
would be Folly it would be the
deliberate disregarding of extremely
recent history to expect Israel's
response in Gaza to October 7th to be
anything but Israel has told um
Palestinians to flee the North to the
south of Gaza and then bombed the south
of Gaza Israel's response to October 7th
was Collective punishment extending and
constricting The Siege that is existed
in Gaza for 16 years keeping food fuel
water life-saving medicine out of Gaza
um nearly a week ago Gaza had run out of
um uh anesthesia at its hospitals Gaza
long since ran out of fuel um Israel's
response is a collective punishment it
is not aimed at Hamas there is no Theory
at work here of what a victory over
Hamas let alone a decisive victory of
Hamas looks like and it also raises the
question that the United States decided
um after 911 it didn't have to confront
out of its trauma which is what is the
day after Victory look like what is the
day after this operation is finished
look like is Israel going to reoccupy
Gaza it doesn't want to do that there
was no constituency for that even among
the most right-wing um government in
Israeli history before October 7th is it
going to have a discredited Palestinian
Authority on behalf of Israel administer
the West Bank is it going to make an
agonizing choice that politically it has
cut itself off from in terms of
Permitting uh Gaza to still be governed
by Hamas because that might be a more
stable way of extricating Israel from
this ground operation that we're fearing
or is Israel going to commit ethnic
cleansing all of this supported by the
United States those are the only four
outcomes there are here uh you mentioned
the United States so I want to get right
into that Biden said that he doesn't
want Israel to repeat America's
mistakes but are America's actions going
in that direction absolutely they're
going in that direction it was very
conspicuous to me um that Biden spoke
about not making the same mistakes which
he said were mistakes of Rage after 911
first that he didn't detail what those
mistakes actually are he also said we
got Justice I don't really see there
being much Justice out of by a
conservative estimate killing 900,000
people creating millions of refugees
even a
2019 Army study US Army study said quite
possibly the only beneficiaries of the
war on terror were Iran whose position
throughout the Middle East was
strengthened and then secondly after
meeting with the Israeli War cabinet
attending an hours long meeting of the
war cabinet Biden came back and made a
speech to the American people that
detailed not at all the barest theory of
what Israeli Victory is and how it's
achieved what the end state is and its
pathway all of this is deeply
reminiscent of the war on terror and
that ought to be a cautionary tale
because there is still time to stop a
ground Invasion I want to make sure that
we leave some space for some Israeli uh
narratives here and one of them is that
it's easy for people sitting in Berlin
or New York to condemn Israel's
overreaction but when you're dealing
with terrorists you cannot be
softed what do you think how did the
terrorists get there the terrorists got
there if you want to take the most
immediate
example of a policy by the current
Israeli Prime Minister to permit Gaza
with funding flowing in from Qatar
uh to be governed by Hamas for Hamas to
govern Gaza to keep gazin under hamas's
thumb so that the Palestinians could be
divided and in that division Israel
would not have to divest itself of the
West Bank this was deliberate Israeli
policy that turned out to be
catastrophic and I have loved ones in
Israel my people I love here in the
United States have loved ones in Israel
I am Jewish I feel this very acutely
this is a predictable outcome of this
policy that we have seen manifest
throughout Israeli history the reason
why the Israeli government did that is
to make sure that it can hold on to the
West Bank rather than deal with a final
status negotiation for the just causes
the just aspiration of the Palestinian
national project
only when th those just aspirations are
credibly addressed will we actually have
safety for the people I love in Israel
as well as for the people I love in
Palestine everything beside that is a
very real human consequence we of course
have to keep space for the fact that
Hamas committed a terrorist atrocity
that there are innocent people kidnapped
in tunnels right now and that there were
innocent civilians massacred by Hamas in
southern Israel there is only one stable
way to stop that from happening and it
is to credibly address adjudicate and
reach a final status a just pece for the
just aspirations of Palestinian National
Liberation and Israeli safety yeah
although not every path the US took
after 911 at least According to some
critics looks mistaken in hindsight and
for example the decision to destroy the
Islamic State rather than seeking
coexistence with it many considered a
good call I understand that I am
sympathetic to it it is also important
to ask the crucial question how did the
Islamic State get there in the first
place and the answer is the 2003
invasion of Iraq where before there was
the barest minimum of an Al-Qaeda
Presence by the very next year Al-Qaeda
had established the most nihilistic
murderous capable and
aggressive franchise in its entire
existence to the point where Osama Bin
Laden himself had to plead with the head
of al-Qaeda and Iraq to stop killing so
many Muslims the United States thought
it destroyed Al-Qaeda and Iraq it never
in fact did them that it gave it a
second chance at life in uh American
Military prisons and then when uh the
war on the civil war in Syria became a
disaster next door these two strains
merged together and created the Islamic
State the American supported war against
the Islamic State was a direct
consequence of America having to clean
up an earlier mess of the global war on
terror what is the outcome of the
destruction of the Islamic State there
are at least 55,000 people in an open
air prison supported by the US in
eastern Syria the size of a small town
is held in a prison where the ultimate
disposition of those inside men women
and children is entirely unclear this is
a powder keg we have not perhaps seen
the end of where the war on Isis is as
as as horrific a thing as Isis is
another iteration may still be possible
and unless the US deals with these
fundamental material conditions that
make all of these policy decisions that
make all of this worse we have no reason
to expect them to get any better we can
only expect periods of quiet that last
however long they last I know we have
reached the end of the conversation but
I really wanted to ask you one last
thing you make a point uh that I would
like to highlight that the 9/11 attack
was so
hideous that presenting a context to try
to understand it was seen as
outrageous can you elaborate on that and
are we seeing the same now too yes so uh
one of the most important aspects of
9911 politics is to make scandalous the
presentation of context uh after 911 uh
people like the um American intellectual
Susan sag were shouted down and driven
out of respectable public and media
conversations because she very
delicately wrote In The New Yorker that
the 911 attacks came not out of thin air
came not out of as the President of the
United States put it a hatred of freedom
but instead as a response to Decades of
American violent and exploitative policy
in the Middle East you don't to
sympathize with Al-Qaeda to recognize
that it had a political agenda that it
articulated that came out of grievances
with American policy that are shared far
beyond people who would ever be
sympathetic to Al-Qaeda she was shouted
down so that those conditions did not
have to be credibly addressed by policy
makers the result was the narrowing of
respectable opinion that became a Glide
path to the Wars and all of the
devastations that that they existed the
exact same thing is happening after
October 7th um both in Israel and
America the refusal to accept the
humanity of Palestinians and we have
seen the Hideous consequences of this
not just in Gaza but also in the United
States where a six-year-old boy in
Illinois Fida Alf was murdered by his
own landlord who had been ingest ing
nonstop media narratives dehumanizing
the Palestinians and killed him and put
his mother in the hospital by screaming
you Muslims have to die we're right back
to the darkest days after
911 is there something that I didn't ask
you that you would like to add to the
conversation all I would say is these
are choices that American and Israeli
policy makers are making after 911 there
was a presentation by politicians and
journalists that war was the only answer
that there was no alternative that
America had to militarize and transform
its own understandings of the
relationship between freedom and
Security in a new post 911 world that
was always a lie it led to a disaster
and we don't have to make those same
choices a second time Spencer thank you
so much I really appreciate you taking
the time thank you so much
Chris